5 coordination mechanisms
Ms. Raku made pottery in her basement. That involved a number of distinct tasks-wedging clay, forming pots, tooling them when semi-dry, preparing and then applying the glazes, and firing the pots in the kiln. But the coordination of all these tasks presented no problem: she did them all herself.
The problem was her ambition and the attractiveness of her pots: the orders exceeded her production capacity. So she hired Miss Bisque, who was eager to learn pottery. But this meant Ms. Raku had to divide up the work. Since the craft shops wanted pottery made by Ms. Raku, it was decided that Miss Bisque would wedge the clay and prepare the glazes, and Ms. Raku would do the rest. And this required coordination of the work, a small problem, in fact, with two people in a pottery studio: they simply communicated informally.
The arrangement worked well, so well that before long Ms. Raku was again swamped with orders. More assistants were needed, but this time, foreseeing the day when they would be forming pots themselves, Ms. Raku decided to hire them right out of the local pottery school. So while it had taken some time to train Miss Bisque, the three new assistants knew exactly what to do at the outset and blended right in; even with five people, coordination presented no problem.
As two more assistants were added, however, coordination problems did arise. One day Miss Bisque tripped over a pail of glaze and broke five pots; another day Ms. Raku opened the kiln to find that the hanging planters had all been glazed fuchsia by mistake. At this point, she realized that seven people in a small pottery studio could not coordinate all of their work through the simple mechanism of informal communication. (There were 21 possible channels by which two people could communicate.) Making matters worse was the fact that Ms. Raku, now calling herself president of Ceramics Limited, was forced to spend more and more time with customers; indeed, these days she was more likely found in a Marimekko dress than a pair of jeans. So she named Miss Bisque studio manager, to occupy herself full-time with supervising and coordinating the work of the five producers of the pottery.
The firm continued to grow. Major changes again took place when an intern analyst was hired. He recommended changes whereby each individual performed only one task for one of the product lines (pots, ashtrays, hanging planters, and ceramic animals)-the first wedged, the second formed, the third tooled, and so on. Thus, production took the form of four assembly lines. Each person followed a set of standard instructions, worked out in advance to ensure the coordination of all their work. Of course, Ceramics Limited no longer sold to craft shops; Ms. Raku would only accept orders by the gross, most of which came from chains of discount stores.
Ms. Raku's ambition was limitless, and when the chance came to diversify, she did. First ceramic tiles, then bathroom fixtures, finally clay bricks. The firm was subsequently partitioned into three divisions-consumer products, building products, and industrial products. From her office on the fifty-fifth story of the Pottery Tower, she coordinated the activities of the divisions by reviewing their performance each quarter of the year and taking personal action when their profit and growth figures dipped below that budgeted. It was while sitting at her desk one day going over these budgets that Ms. Raku gazed out at the surrounding skyscrapers and decided to rename her company "Ceramico."
Every organized human activity-from the making of pots to the placing of a man on the moon- gives rise to two fundamental and opposing requirements: the division of labor into various tasks to be performed and the coordination of these tasks to accomplish the activity. The structure of an organization can be defined simply as the sum total of the ways in which it divides its labor into distinct tasks and then achieves coordination among them.
In Ceramico the division of labor-wedging, forming, tooling, glazing, firing-was dictated largely by the job to be done and the technical system available to do it. Coordination, however, proved to be a more complicated affair, involving various means. These can be referred to as coordinating mechanisms, although it should be noted that they are as much concerned with control and communication as with coordination.
Five coordinating mechanisms seem to explain the fundamental ways in which organizations coordinate their work: mutual adjustment, direct supervision, standardization of work processes, standardization of work outputs, and standardization of worker skills. These should be considered the most basic elements of structure, the glue that holds organizations together.
A. Mutual Adjustment
Mutual adjustment achieves the coordination of work by the simple process of informal communication. Under mutual adjustment, control of the work rests in the hands of the doers, as shown in the figure.
 
Because it is such a simple coordinating mechanism, mutual adjustment is naturally used in the very simplest of organizations: for example, by two people in a canoe or a few in a pottery studio. Paradoxically, it is also used in the most complicated, because, as we shall see later, it is the only one that works under extremely difficult circumstances. Consider the organization charged with putting a man on the moon for the first time. Such an activity requires an incredibly elaborate division of labor, with thousands of specialists doing all kinds of specific jobs. But at the outset, no one can be sure exactly what needs to be done. That knowledge develops as the work unfolds. So in the final analysis, despite the use of other coordinating mechanisms, the success of the undertaking depends primarily on the ability of the specialists to adapt to each other along their uncharted route, not altogether unlike the two people in the canoe.
B. Direct Supervision
As an organization outgrows its simplest state-more than five or six people at work in a pottery studio, fifteen people paddling a war canoe-it tends to turn to a second coordinating mechanism. Direct supervision achieves coordination by having one individual take responsibility for the work of others, issuing instructions to them and monitoring their actions, as indicated in the figure. In effect, one brain coordinates several hands, as in the case of the supervisor of the pottery studio or the caller of the stroke in the war canoe.
 
Consider the structure of an American football team. Here the division of labor is quite sharp: eleven players are distinguished by the work they do, its location on the field, and even its physical requirements. The slim halfback stands behind the line of scrimmage and carries the ball; the squat tackle stands on the line and blocks. Mutual adjustments do not suffice to coordinate their work, so a field leader is named, called the quarterback, and he coordinates their work by calling the plays.
Standardization
Work can also be coordinated without mutual adjustment or direct supervision. It can be standardized: "The coordination of parts is incorporated in the program (for the work) when it is established, and the need for continuing communication is correspondingly reduced" (March and Simon, 1958, p. 162). Coordination is achieved on the drawing board, so to speak, before the work is undertaken. The workers on the automobile assembly line and the surgeons in the hospital operating room need not worry about coordinating with their colleagues under ordinary circumstances-they know exactly what to expect of them and proceed accordingly.
The figure shows the three basic ways to achieve standardization in organizations. The work processes themselves, the outputs of the work, and the inputs to the work-the skills (and knowledge) of the people who do the work-can all be designed to meet predetermined standards.
 
C1. Standardization of work processes
Work processes are standardized when the contents of the work are specified, or programmed. An example that comes to mind involves the assembly instructions provided with a child's toy. Here, the manufacturer in effect standardizes the work process of the parent. ('Take the two-inch round-head Phillips screw and insert it into hole BX, attaching this to part XB with the lock washer and hexagonal nut, at the same time holding....")
Standardization can be carried to great lengths in organizations, as in the four assembly lines in Ceramics Limited, or the pie filler I once observed in a bakery who dipped a ladel into a vat of pie filling literally thousands of times every day-cherry, blueberry, or apple, it made no difference to him -and emptied the contents into a pie crust that came around on a turntable. He required little direct supervision and no informal communication with his peers (except to maintain his sanity). 
See example of sandwich assemble below from McDonalds Corp.
Coordination of his work was accomplished by whoever designed that turntable. All the pie filler did was follow instructions, without concern for the workers on either side who placed the crusts under and over the filling. Of course, other work standards leave more room to maneuver: the purchasing agent may be required to get at least three bids on all orders over $10,000, but is otherwise left free to do his work as he sees fit.
C2. Standardization of outputs
Outputs are standardized when the results of the work, for example the dimensions of the product or the performance, are specified. Taxi drivers are not told how to drive or what route to take; they are merely informed where to deliver their fares. The wedger is not told how to prepare the clay, only to do so in four-pound lumps; the thrower on the wheel knows that those lumps will produce pots of a certain size (his own output standard). With outputs standardized, the interfaces among tasks are predetermined, as in the book bindery which knows that the pages it receives from one place will fit perfectly into the covers it receives from another. Similarly, all the chiefs of the Ceramico divisions interfaced with headquarters in terms of performance standards. They were expected to produce certain profit and growth levels every quarter: how they did this was their own business.
C3. Standardization of Skills
Sometimes neither the work nor its outputs can be standardized, yet some coordination is required. Antony Jay (1970) raises this issue in the context of the colonial empires. How were the kings to control and coordinate the activities of their governors, in charge of distant colonies, when direct supervision was impeded by communication channels that took months to run full cycle, and neither the work itself nor its outputs were amenable to standardization? The solution they adopted-that used by Ms. Raku to hire assistants in the pottery studio-was to standardize the worker who came to the work, if not the work itself or its outputs. Skills (and knowledge) are standardized when the kind of training required to perform the work is specified. The king trusted the governors because he trained them himself. More commonly, the individual is trained before he even joins the organization. Ms. Raku hired potters from school, just as hospitals do when they engage doctors. These institutions build right into the workers-to-be the work programs, as well as the basis of coordination. On the job, the workers appear to be acting autonomously, just as the good actor on the stage seems to be speaking extemporaneously. But in fact both have learned their lines well. So standardization of skills achieve indirectly what standardization of work processes or of work outputs does directly: it controls and coordinates the work. When an anesthesiologist and a surgeon meet in the operating room to remove an appendix, they need hardly communicate; by virtue of their respective training, they know exactly what to expect of each other. Their standardized skills take care of most of the coordination.
A continuum of coordinating mechanisms
These five coordinating mechanisms seem to fall into a rough order. As organizational work becomes more complicated, the favored means of coordination seems to shift, as shown in the figure, from mutual adjustment to direct supervision to standardization, preferably of work processes, otherwise of outputs, or else of skills, finally reverting back to mutual adjustment.
 

An individual working alone has no great need for any of the mechanisms -coordination takes place simply, in one brain. Add a second person, however, and the situation changes significantly. Now coordination must be achieved across brains. Generally, people working side by side in small groups adapt to each other informally: mutual adjustment becomes the favored means of coordination.
As the group gets larger, however, it becomes less able to coordinate informally. Miller (1959) notes that coal mining groups with as many as 41 men have been found to function effectively. But with the advent of further growth or sharper divisions of labor-different shifts, different locations - more complex technical systems- supervision becomes a necessity:
Postponement of differentiation of the management function beyond the optimum stage ... leads to a decline in the efficiency of the system. . .. The energies of group members, instead of being devoted to the primary task, are increasingly diverted to the task of holding the group together ... (p.88).
Thus, there is a need for leadership. Control of the work of the group passes to a single individual, in effect, back to a single brain that now regulates others: direct supervision becomes the favored coordinating mechanism.
As the work becomes more involved, another major transition tends to occur. Whereas in the last one, some control of the work shifted from the worker to a supervisor, now there is a shift to standardization. As noted earlier, the organization has three choices here. When the tasks are. simple and routine, the organization is tempted to rely on the standardization of the work processes themselves. But more complex work may preclude this, forcing the organization to turn to standardization of the outputs -specifying the results of the work but leaving the choice of process to the worker. In complex work, however, the outputs often cannot be standardized either, and so the organization must settle for standardizing the skills of the worker, if possible.
But should the divided tasks of the organization prove impossible to standardize, it may be forced to return full cycle, to favor the simplest, yet most adaptable coordinating mechanism -mutual adjustment. As noted earlier, sophisticated problem solvers facing extremely complicated situations must communicate informally if they are to accomplish their work. 
Our discussion to this point implies that under specific conditions an organization will favor one coordinating mechanism over the others. It also suggests that the five are somewhat substitutable: the organization can replace one with another. These suggestions should not, however, be taken to mean that any organization can rely on a single coordinating mechanism. Most, in fact, mix all five. At the very least,  a certain amount of direct supervision and mutual adjustment is always required, no matter what the reliance on standardization. Contemporary organizations simply cannot exist without leadership and informal communication, even if only to override the rigidities of standardization.  In the most automated (i.e., fully standardized) factory, machines break down, employees fail to show up for work, schedules must be changed at the last minute. Supervisors must intervene and workers must be free to deal with unexpected problems. Thus, Wren (1967) describes the Northeast Canada-United States Electric Grid System, which was fully automatic but lacked an effective override: "Technologically the systems were related for operating economies; organizationally, they were not. There were no, or few, provisions for linking the autonomous, yet interdependent, systems together" (p. 73). The result was the famous blackout of 1965.
In general, beyond some minimum size, most organizations seem to rely on standardization where they can; where they cannot, they use direct supervision or mutual adjustment, these two being partly interchangeable. When direct supervision fails, perhaps because the task of coordination is too big for one brain, the organization will resort to mutual adjustment. Alternatively, when mutual adjustment breaks down, perhaps because there is a need for one brain to guide others that cannot agree among themselves, the organization will turn to direct supervision.
