

Business Structure



Introduction
The key functions that managers perform include planning, organizing, leading, and controlling. This module focuses specifically on the organizing function. Organizing involves coordinating and allocating a firm’s resources so that the firm can carry out its plans and achieve its goals. This organizing, or structuring, process is accomplished by:
* Determining work activities and dividing up tasks (division of labor)
* Grouping jobs and employees (departmentalization)
* Assigning authority and responsibilities (delegation)
The result of the organizing process is a formal structure within an organization. An organization is the order and design of relationships within a company or firm. It consists of two or more people working together with a common objective and clarity of purpose. Formal organizations also have well-defined lines of authority, channels for information flow, and means of control. Human, material, financial, and information resources are deliberately connected to form the business organization. Some connections are long-lasting, such as the links among people in the finance or marketing department. Others can be changed at almost any time—for example, when a committee is formed to study a problem.
Every organization has some kind of underlying structure. Typically, organizations base their frameworks on traditional, contemporary, or team-based approaches. Traditional structures are more rigid and group employees by function, products, processes, customers, or regions. Contemporary and team-based structures are more flexible and assemble employees to respond quickly to dynamic business environments. Regardless of the structural framework a company chooses to implement, all managers must first consider what kind of work needs to be done within the firm.
Division of Labor
The process of dividing work into separate jobs and assigning tasks to workers is called division of labor. In a fast-food restaurant, for example, some employees take or fill orders, others prepare food, a few clean and maintain equipment, and at least one supervises all the others. In an auto assembly plant, some workers install rearview mirrors, while others mount bumpers on bumper brackets. The degree to which the tasks are subdivided into smaller jobs is called specialization. Employees who work at highly specialized jobs, such as assembly-line workers, perform a limited number and variety of tasks. Employees who become specialists at one task, or a small number of tasks, develop greater skill in doing that particular job. This can lead to greater efficiency and consistency in production and other work activities. However, a high degree of specialization can also result in employees who are disinterested or bored due to the lack of variety and challenge.
An organization chart is a visual representation of the structured relationships among tasks and the people given the authority to do those tasks. In the organization chart in Exhibit 7.4, each figure represents a job, and each job includes several tasks. The sales manager, for instance, must hire salespeople, establish sales territories, motivate and train the salespeople, and control sales operations. The chart also indicates the general type of work done in each position.

The 5 Organizational Design Choices
The design of a business structure imposes choices in terms of:
* Coordination
* Span of Control
* Work division and specialization (who does what)
* Distribution of authority (chain of authority, authority relations)
* Degree of centralization (decision making)

1. Coordination
Ms. Raku made pottery in her basement. That involved a number of distinct tasks-wedging clay, forming pots, tooling them when semi-dry, preparing and then applying the glazes, and firing the pots in the kiln. But the coordination of all these tasks presented no problem: she did them all herself.
The problem was her ambition and the attractiveness of her pots: the orders exceeded her production capacity. So she hired Miss Bisque, who was eager to learn pottery. But this meant Ms. Raku had to divide up the work. Since the craft shops wanted pottery made by Ms. Raku, it was decided that Miss Bisque would wedge the clay and prepare the glazes, and Ms. Raku would do the rest. And this required coordination of the work, a small problem, in fact, with two people in a pottery studio: they simply communicated informally.
The arrangement worked well, so well that before long Ms. Raku was again swamped with orders. More assistants were needed, but this time, foreseeing the day when they would be forming pots themselves, Ms. Raku decided to hire them right out of the local pottery school. So while it had taken some time to train Miss Bisque, the three new assistants knew exactly what to do at the outset and blended right in; even with five people, coordination presented no problem.
As two more assistants were added, however, coordination problems did arise. One day Miss Bisque tripped over a pail of glaze and broke five pots; another day Ms. Raku opened the kiln to find that the hanging planters had all been glazed fuchsia by mistake. At this point, she realized that seven people in a small pottery studio could not coordinate all of their work through the simple mechanism of informal communication. (There were 21 possible channels by which two people could communicate.) Making matters worse was the fact that Ms. Raku, now calling herself president of Ceramics Limited, was forced to spend more and more time with customers; indeed, these days she was more likely found in a Marimekko dress than a pair of jeans. So she named Miss Bisque studio manager, to occupy herself full-time with supervising and coordinating the work of the five producers of the pottery.
The firm continued to grow. Major changes again took place when an intern analyst was hired. He recommended changes whereby each individual performed only one task for one of the product lines (pots, ashtrays, hanging planters, and ceramic animals)-the first wedged, the second formed, the third tooled, and so on. Thus, production took the form of four assembly lines. Each person followed a set of standard instructions, worked out in advance to ensure the coordination of all their work. Of course, Ceramics Limited no longer sold to craft shops; Ms. Raku would only accept orders by the gross, most of which came from chains of discount stores.
Ms. Raku's ambition was limitless, and when the chance came to diversify, she did. First ceramic tiles, then bathroom fixtures, finally clay bricks. The firm was subsequently partitioned into three divisions-consumer products, building products, and industrial products. From her office on the fifty-fifth story of the Pottery Tower, she coordinated the activities of the divisions by reviewing their performance each quarter of the year and taking personal action when their profit and growth figures dipped below that budgeted. It was while sitting at her desk one day going over these budgets that Ms. Raku gazed out at the surrounding skyscrapers and decided to rename her company "Ceramico."
Every organized human activity-from the making of pots to the placing of a man on the moon- gives rise to two fundamental and opposing requirements: the division of labor into various tasks to be performed and the coordination of these tasks to accomplish the activity. The structure of an organization can be defined simply as the sum total of the ways in which it divides its labor into distinct tasks and then achieves coordination among them.
In Ceramico the division of labor-wedging, forming, tooling, glazing, firing-was dictated largely by the job to be done and the technical system available to do it. Coordination, however, proved to be a more complicated affair, involving various means. These can be referred to as coordinating mechanisms, although it should be noted that they are as much concerned with control and communication as with coordination.
Five coordinating mechanisms seem to explain the fundamental ways in which organizations coordinate their work: mutual adjustment, direct supervision, standardization of work processes, standardization of work outputs, and standardization of worker skills. These should be considered the most basic elements of structure, the glue that holds organizations together.

A. Mutual Adjustment
Mutual adjustment achieves the coordination of work by the simple process of informal communication. Under mutual adjustment, control of the work rests in the hands of the doers, as shown in the figure.

Because it is such a simple coordinating mechanism, mutual adjustment is naturally used in the very simplest of organizations: for example, by two people in a canoe or a few in a pottery studio. Paradoxically, it is also used in the most complicated, because, as we shall see later, it is the only one that works under extremely difficult circumstances. Consider the organization charged with putting a man on the moon for the first time. Such an activity requires an incredibly elaborate division of labor, with thousands of specialists doing all kinds of specific jobs. But at the outset, no one can be sure exactly what needs to be done. That knowledge develops as the work unfolds. So in the final analysis, despite the use of other coordinating mechanisms, the success of the undertaking depends primarily on the ability of the specialists to adapt to each other along their uncharted route, not altogether unlike the two people in the canoe.

B. Direct Supervision
As an organization outgrows its simplest state-more than five or six people at work in a pottery studio, fifteen people paddling a war canoe-it tends to turn to a second coordinating mechanism. Direct supervision achieves coordination by having one individual take responsibility for the work of others, issuing instructions to them and monitoring their actions, as indicated in the figure. In effect, one brain coordinates several hands, as in the case of the supervisor of the pottery studio or the caller of the stroke in the war canoe.

Consider the structure of an American football team. Here the division of labor is quite sharp: eleven players are distinguished by the work they do, its location on the field, and even its physical requirements. The slim halfback stands behind the line of scrimmage and carries the ball; the squat tackle stands on the line and blocks. Mutual adjustments do not suffice to coordinate their work, so a field leader is named, called the quarterback, and he coordinates their work by calling the plays.
Standardization
Work can also be coordinated without mutual adjustment or direct supervision. It can be standardized: "The coordination of parts is incorporated in the program (for the work) when it is established, and the need for continuing communication is correspondingly reduced" (March and Simon, 1958, p. 162). Coordination is achieved on the drawing board, so to speak, before the work is undertaken. The workers on the automobile assembly line and the surgeons in the hospital operating room need not worry about coordinating with their colleagues under ordinary circumstances-they know exactly what to expect of them and proceed accordingly.
The figure shows the three basic ways to achieve standardization in organizations. The work processes themselves, the outputs of the work, and the inputs to the work-the skills (and knowledge) of the people who do the work-can all be designed to meet predetermined standards.

C1. Standardization of work processes
Work processes are standardized when the contents of the work are specified, or programmed. An example that comes to mind involves the assembly instructions provided with a child's toy. Here, the manufacturer in effect standardizes the work process of the parent. ('Take the two-inch round-head Phillips screw and insert it into hole BX, attaching this to part XB with the lock washer and hexagonal nut, at the same time holding....")
Standardization can be carried to great lengths in organizations, as in the four assembly lines in Ceramics Limited, or the pie filler I once observed in a bakery who dipped a ladel into a vat of pie filling literally thousands of times every day-cherry, blueberry, or apple, it made no difference to him -and emptied the contents into a pie crust that came around on a turntable. He required little direct supervision and no informal communication with his peers (except to maintain his sanity). 
See example of sandwich assemble below from McDonalds Corp.
Coordination of his work was accomplished by whoever designed that turntable. All the pie filler did was follow instructions, without concern for the workers on either side who placed the crusts under and over the filling. Of course, other work standards leave more room to maneuver: the purchasing agent may be required to get at least three bids on all orders over $10,000, but is otherwise left free to do his work as he sees fit.

C2. Standardization of outputs
Outputs are standardized when the results of the work, for example the dimensions of the product or the performance, are specified. Taxi drivers are not told how to drive or what route to take; they are merely informed where to deliver their fares. The wedger is not told how to prepare the clay, only to do so in four-pound lumps; the thrower on the wheel knows that those lumps will produce pots of a certain size (his own output standard). With outputs standardized, the interfaces among tasks are predetermined, as in the book bindery which knows that the pages it receives from one place will fit perfectly into the covers it receives from another. Similarly, all the chiefs of the Ceramico divisions interfaced with headquarters in terms of performance standards. They were expected to produce certain profit and growth levels every quarter: how they did this was their own business.

C3. Standardization of Skills
Sometimes neither the work nor its outputs can be standardized, yet some coordination is required. Antony Jay (1970) raises this issue in the context of the colonial empires. How were the kings to control and coordinate the activities of their governors, in charge of distant colonies, when direct supervision was impeded by communication channels that took months to run full cycle, and neither the work itself nor its outputs were amenable to standardization? The solution they adopted-that used by Ms. Raku to hire assistants in the pottery studio-was to standardize the worker who came to the work, if not the work itself or its outputs. Skills (and knowledge) are standardized when the kind of training required to perform the work is specified. The king trusted the governors because he trained them himself. More commonly, the individual is trained before he even joins the organization. Ms. Raku hired potters from school, just as hospitals do when they engage doctors. These institutions build right into the workers-to-be the work programs, as well as the basis of coordination. On the job, the workers appear to be acting autonomously, just as the good actor on the stage seems to be speaking extemporaneously. But in fact both have learned their lines well. So standardization of skills achieve indirectly what standardization of work processes or of work outputs does directly: it controls and coordinates the work. When an anesthesiologist and a surgeon meet in the operating room to remove an appendix, they need hardly communicate; by virtue of their respective training, they know exactly what to expect of each other. Their standardized skills take care of most of the coordination.
A continuum of coordinating mechanisms

These five coordinating mechanisms seem to fall into a rough order. As organizational work becomes more complicated, the favored means of coordination seems to shift, as shown in the figure, from mutual adjustment to direct supervision to standardization, preferably of work processes, otherwise of outputs, or else of skills, finally reverting back to mutual adjustment.


An individual working alone has no great need for any of the mechanisms -coordination takes place simply, in one brain. Add a second person, however, and the situation changes significantly. Now coordination must be achieved across brains. Generally, people working side by side in small groups adapt to each other informally: mutual adjustment becomes the favored means of coordination.
As the group gets larger, however, it becomes less able to coordinate informally. Miller (1959) notes that coal mining groups with as many as 41 men have been found to function effectively. But with the advent of further growth or sharper divisions of labor-different shifts, different locations - more complex technical systems- supervision becomes a necessity:
Postponement of differentiation of the management function beyond the optimum stage ... leads to a decline in the efficiency of the system. . .. The energies of group members, instead of being devoted to the primary task, are increasingly diverted to the task of holding the group together ... (p.88).

Thus, there is a need for leadership. Control of the work of the group passes to a single individual, in effect, back to a single brain that now regulates others: direct supervision becomes the favored coordinating mechanism.

As the work becomes more involved, another major transition tends to occur. Whereas in the last one, some control of the work shifted from the worker to a supervisor, now there is a shift to standardization. As noted earlier, the organization has three choices here. When the tasks are. simple and routine, the organization is tempted to rely on the standardization of the work processes themselves. But more complex work may preclude this, forcing the organization to turn to standardization of the outputs -specifying the results of the work but leaving the choice of process to the worker. In complex work, however, the outputs often cannot be standardized either, and so the organization must settle for standardizing the skills of the worker, if possible.

But should the divided tasks of the organization prove impossible to standardize, it may be forced to return full cycle, to favor the simplest, yet most adaptable coordinating mechanism -mutual adjustment. As noted earlier, sophisticated problem solvers facing extremely complicated situations must communicate informally if they are to accomplish their work. 

Our discussion to this point implies that under specific conditions an organization will favor one coordinating mechanism over the others. It also suggests that the five are somewhat substitutable: the organization can replace one with another. These suggestions should not, however, be taken to mean that any organization can rely on a single coordinating mechanism. Most, in fact, mix all five. At the very least,  a certain amount of direct supervision and mutual adjustment is always required, no matter what the reliance on standardization. Contemporary organizations simply cannot exist without leadership and informal communication, even if only to override the rigidities of standardization.  In the most automated (i.e., fully standardized) factory, machines break down, employees fail to show up for work, schedules must be changed at the last minute. Supervisors must intervene and workers must be free to deal with unexpected problems. Thus, Wren (1967) describes the Northeast Canada-United States Electric Grid System, which was fully automatic but lacked an effective override: "Technologically the systems were related for operating economies; organizationally, they were not. There were no, or few, provisions for linking the autonomous, yet interdependent, systems together" (p. 73). The result was the famous blackout of 1965.

In general, beyond some minimum size, most organizations seem to rely on standardization where they can; where they cannot, they use direct supervision or mutual adjustment, these two being partly interchangeable. When direct supervision fails, perhaps because the task of coordination is too big for one brain, the organization will resort to mutual adjustment. Alternatively, when mutual adjustment breaks down, perhaps because there is a need for one brain to guide others that cannot agree among themselves, the organization will turn to direct supervision.

2. Span of Control
Each firm must decide how many managers are needed at each level of the management hierarchy to effectively supervise the work performed within organizational units. A manager’s span of control (sometimes called span of management) is the number of employees the manager directly supervises. It can be as narrow as two or three employees or as wide as 50 or more. In general, the larger the span of control, the more efficient the organization. As Table 7.2 shows, however, both narrow and wide spans of control have benefits and drawbacks.


If hundreds of employees perform the same job, one supervisor may be able to manage a very large number of employees. Such might be the case at a clothing plant, where hundreds of sewing machine operators work from identical patterns. But if employees perform complex and dissimilar tasks, a manager can effectively supervise only a much smaller number. For instance, a supervisor in the research and development area of a pharmaceutical company might oversee just a few research chemists due to the highly complex nature of their jobs.
The optimal span of control is determined by the following five factors:
* Nature of the task. The more complex the task, the narrower the span of control.
* Location of the workers. The more locations, the narrower the span of control.
* Ability of the manager to delegate responsibility. The greater the ability to delegate, the wider the span of control.
* Amount of interaction and feedback between the workers and the manager. The more feedback and interaction required, the narrower the span of control.
* Level of skill and motivation of the workers. The higher the skill level and motivation, the wider the span of control.

3. Work division and specialization
Jobs can be specialized in two dimensions. First is its "breadth" or "scope"-how many different tasks are contained in each and how broad or narrow is each of these tasks. At one extreme, the worker is a jack-of-all trades, forever jumping from one broad task to another; at the other extreme, he focuses his efforts on the same highly specialized task, repeated day-in and day-out even minute-in and minute-out. The second dimension of specialization relates to “depth”, to the control over the work. At one extreme, the worker merely does the work without any thought as to how or why; at the other, he controls every aspect of the work in addition to doing it. The first dimension may be called horizontal job specialization (in that it deals with parallel activities) and its opposite, horizontal job enlargement; the second, vertical job specialization and vertical job enlargement.

a. Horizontal Job Specialization

Job specialization in the horizontal dimension -the predominant form of division of labor- is an inherent part of every organization, indeed every human activity. For example, Filley et al. (1976, p. 337) note that work in the tenth-century English textile industry was divided into spinning, weaving, dying, and printing, while Udy (1959, p. 91) notes that on a seal hunt,the Gilyak eskimos divide their labor within the boat among harpooner, oarsman, and helmsman. In fact, the term "division of labor" dates back to 1776, when Adam Smith wrote The Wealth of Nations. There he presented his famous example which even by 1776 "the division of labor has been very often taken notice of, the trade of the pin maker":
One man draws out the wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on is a peculiar business, to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them into the paper; and the important business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations, which, in some manufactories, are all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same man will sometimes perform two or three of them (Smith, 1910, p. 5).

Organizations so divide their labor -specialize their jobs- to increase productivity. Adam Smith noted that in one pin factory, 10 men specialized in their work were able to turn out about 12 pounds of pins in a day, about 4800 pins each. "But if they had all wrought separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day ..." (p. 5).

What are the reasons for such productivity increases? Smith notes three, the improved dexterity of the workman from specializing in one task, the saving in time lost in switching tasks, and the development of new methods and machines that come from specialization. All three reasons point to the key factor that links specialization to productivity: repetition. Horizontal specialization increases the repetition in the work, thereby facilitating its standardization. The outputs can be produced more uniformly and more efficiently. Horizontal specialization also focuses the attention of the worker, which facilitates learning. All individuals have limited cognition; in a world of technical and organization complexity, they can only deal effectively with comprehensible parts of the whole:
By giving each (member) a particular task to accomplish, (the organization) directs and limits his attention to that task. The personnel officer concerns himself with recruitment, training, classification, and other personnel operations. He need not give particular concern to the accounting, purchasing, planning, or operative functions, which are equally vital to the accomplishment of the organization's task, because he knows they have been provided for elsewhere in the organization structure (Simon, 1957, p. 102).
Support for this argument comes from Charns et al. (1977) who found in a study of medical centers that doctors who performed concurrently the different roles of clinician, teacher, and researcher tended to confuse or "blurr" these tasks to the detriment of their performance.

A final reason for specialization is that it allows the individual to be matched to the task. Udy notes that the Gilyak eskimos put their best oarsmen toward the stern, their best shots in the bow. Even colonies of army ants find it appropriate to so divide their labor:
.. , the adult ants that differ in size and structure also exhibit contrasting patterns of behavior, with the result that there is a division of labor in the colony. Small workers ... spend most of their time in the nest feeding the larval broods; intermediate-sized workers constitute most of the population, going out on raids as well as doing other jobs. The largest workers ... have a huge head and long, powerful jaws. These individuals are what Verrill called soldiers; they carry no food but customarily run along the flanks of the raiding and emigration columns (Topoff, 1972, p. 72).

b. Vertical Job Specialization
Vertical job specialization separates the performance of the work from the administration of it. Utterer (1965) provides us with a useful way to describe this issue. The Figure shows his basic work control cycle, with the actual performance of an activity at the bottom left and the administration of it -the feedback and control system -above and to the right of it. In the vertically specialized job, the worker only performs the activity; as the job gets vertically enlarged, the worker gains more and more control over the activity- over the decisions involved and then over the goals and standards guiding these decisions.


Teaching offers a good example. Students who use workbooks or copy their lectures word for word have rather vertically specialized work -they simply carry out the activity. In contrast, when the students do projects, they assume control of much of the decision making in their work -their "jobs" become vertically enlarged and they shift from passive responders to active participants. In the case of the pie filler, discussed in Chapter I, his job was highly specialized in the vertical (as well as the horizontal) dimension. Alternatively, were he told to bake a pie to sell for $1.50, he would have had responsibility for sensing, discriminating, and decision making, as well as part of the actual making of the pie, while if he owned the bakery, he would also have been able to decide on the price himself and whether he should have made pies at all, as opposed to, say, bread or bicycles.
Organizations specialize jobs in the vertical dimension in the belief that a different perspective is required to determine how the work should be done. In particular, when a job is highly specialized in the horizontal dimension, the worker's perspective is narrowed, making it difficult for him to relate his work to that of others. So control of the work is often passed to a manager with the overview necessary to coordinate the work by direct supervision or to an analyst who can do so by standardization. Thus, jobs must often be specialized vertically because they are specialized horizontally. That is, the very fact of having to perform a narrow task reduces the perspective of the worker and so robs him of control of it. Hence, we would expect to find a strong positive relationship between horizontal and vertical specialization: many jobs (although not all, as we shall soon see) tend to be either both or neither.

4. Distribution of Authority
Managerial hierarchy (also called the management pyramid) is defined by the levels of management within an organization. Generally, the management structure has three levels: top, middle, and supervisory management. In a managerial hierarchy, each organizational unit is controlled and supervised by a manager in a higher unit. The person with the most formal authority is at the top of the hierarchy. The higher a manager, the more power they have. Thus, the amount of power decreases as you move down the management pyramid. At the same time, the number of employees increases as you move down the hierarchy.

Not all companies today are using this traditional configuration. One company that has eliminated hierarchy altogether is The Morning Star Company, the largest tomato processor in the world. Based in Woodland, California, the company employs 600 permanent “colleagues” and an additional 4,000 workers during harvest season. Founder and sole owner Chris Rufer started the company and based its vision on the philosophy of self-management, in which professionals initiate communication and coordination of their activities with colleagues, customers, suppliers, and others, and take personal responsibility for helping the company achieve its corporate goals.

An organization with a well-defined hierarchy has a clear chain of command, which is the line of authority that extends from one level of the organization to the next, from top to bottom, and makes clear who reports to whom. The chain of command is shown in the organization chart and can be traced from the CEO all the way down to the employees producing goods and services. Under the unity of command principle, everyone reports to and gets instructions from only one boss. Unity of command guarantees that everyone will have a direct supervisor and will not be taking orders from a number of different supervisors. Unity of command and chain of command give everyone in the organization clear directions and help coordinate people doing different jobs.

As we’ll see, matrix organizations automatically violate the unity of command principle because employees report to more than one boss, if only for the duration of a project. For example, Unilever, the consumer-products company that makes Dove soap, Ben & Jerry’s ice cream, and Hellmann’s mayonnaise, used to have a matrix structure with one CEO for North America and another for Europe. But employees in divisions that operated in both locations were unsure about which CEO’s decisions took precedence. Today, the company uses a product departmentalization structure.13 Companies like Unilever tend to abandon matrix structures because of problems associated with unclear or duplicate reporting relationships, in other words, with a lack of unity of command.

Individuals who are part of the chain of command have authority over other persons in the organization. Authority is legitimate power, granted by the organization and acknowledged by employees, that allows an individual to request action and expect compliance. Exercising authority means making decisions and seeing that they are carried out. Most managers delegate, or assign, some degree of authority and responsibility to others below them in the chain of command. The delegation of authority makes the employees accountable to their supervisor. Accountability means responsibility for outcomes. Typically, authority and responsibility move downward through the organization as managers assign activities to, and share decision-making with, their subordinates. Accountability moves upward in the organization as managers in each successively higher level are held accountable for the actions of their subordinates.

A few words about power…..
French and Raven identified five primary ways in which power can be exerted in social situations.

Referent Power. In some cases, person B looks up to or admires person A, and, as a result, B follows A largely because of A’s personal qualities, characteristics, or reputation. In this case, A can use referent power to influence B. Referent power has also been called charismatic power, because allegiance is based on interpersonal attraction of one individual for another. Examples of referent power can be seen in advertising, where companies use celebrities to recommend their products; it is hoped that the star appeal of the person will rub off on the products. In work environments, junior managers often emulate senior managers and assume unnecessarily subservient roles more because of personal admiration than because of respect for authority.

Expert Power. Expert power is demonstrated when person A gains power because A has knowledge or expertise relevant to B. For instance, professors presumably have power in the classroom because of their mastery of a particular subject matter. Other examples of expert power can be seen in staff specialists in organizations (e.g., accountants, labor relations managers, management consultants, and corporate attorneys). In each case, the individual has credibility in a particular—and narrow—area as a result of experience and expertise, and this gives the individual power in that domain.

Legitimate Power. Legitimate power exists when person B submits to person A because B feels that A has a right to exert power in a certain domain. Legitimate power is really another name for authority, as explained earlier. A supervisor has a right, for instance, to assign work. Legitimate power differs from reward and coercive power in that it depends on the official position a person holds, and not on his or her relationship with others. Legitimate power derives from three sources. First, prevailing cultural values can assign power to some group. In Japan and Korea, for instance, older employees derive power simply because of their age. Second, legitimate power can be attained as a result of the accepted social structure. For example, many Western European countries, as well as Japan, have royal families that serve as a cornerstone to their societies. Third, legitimate power may be designated, as in the case of a board of directors choosing a new company president or a person being promoted into a managerial position. Whatever the reason, people exercise legitimate power because subordinates assume they have a right to exercise it. A principal reason given for the downfall of the shah of Iran is that the people came to first question and then denounce his right to legitimate power.

Reward Power. Reward power exists when person A has power over person B because A controls rewards that B wants. These rewards can cover a wide array of possibilities, including pay raises, promotions, desirable job assignments, more responsibility, new equipment, and so forth. Research has indicated that reward power often leads to increased job performance as employees see a strong performance-reward contingency. However, in many organizations, supervisors and managers really do not control very many rewards. For example, salary and promotion among most blue-collar workers is based on a labor contract, not a performance appraisal.

Coercive Power. Coercive power is based primarily on fear. Here, person A has power over person B because A can administer some form of punishment to B. Thus, this kind of power is also referred to as punishment power. As Kipnis points out, coercive power does not have to rest on the threat of violence. “Individuals exercise coercive power through a reliance upon physical strength, verbal facility, or the ability to grant or withhold emotional support from others. These bases provide the individual with the means to physically harm, bully, humiliate, or deny love to others.” Examples of coercive power in organizations include the ability (actual or implied) to fire or demote people, transfer them to undesirable jobs or locations, or strip them of valued perquisites. Indeed, it has been suggested that a good deal of organizational behavior (such as prompt attendance, looking busy, avoiding whistle-blowing) can be attributed to coercive, not reward, power. As Kipnis explains, “Of all the bases of power available to man, the power to hurt others is possibly the most often used, most often condemned and most difficult to control.”

In each case, the power of the individual rests on a particular attribute of the power holder, the follower, or their relationship. In some cases (e.g., reward power), power rests in the superior; in others (e.g., referent power), power is given to the superior by the subordinate. In all cases, the exercise of power involves subtle and sometimes threatening interpersonal consequences for the parties involved. In fact, when power is exercised, employees have several ways in which to respond. 


If the subordinate accepts and identifies with the leader, his behavioral response will probably be one of commitment. That is, the subordinate will be motivated to follow the wishes of the leader. This is most likely to happen when the person in charge uses referent or expert power. Under these circumstances, the follower believes in the leader’s cause and will exert considerable energies to help the leader succeed.

A second possible response is compliance. This occurs most frequently when the subordinate feels the leader has either legitimate power or reward power. Under such circumstances, the follower will comply, either because it is perceived as a duty or because a reward is expected; but commitment or enthusiasm for the project is lacking. Finally, under conditions of coercive power, subordinates will more than likely use resistance. Here, the subordinate sees little reason—either altruistic or material—for cooperating and will often engage in a series of tactics to defeat the leader’s efforts.

5. Degree of Centralization
The final component in building an effective organizational structure is deciding at what level in the organization decisions should be made. Centralization is the degree to which formal authority is concentrated in one area or level of the organization. In a highly centralized structure, top management makes most of the key decisions in the organization, with very little input from lower-level employees. Centralization lets top managers develop a broad view of operations and exercise tight financial controls. It can also help to reduce costs by eliminating redundancy in the organization. But centralization may also mean that lower-level personnel don’t get a chance to develop their decision-making and leadership skills and that the organization is less able to respond quickly to customer demands.

When a company grows, it is often necessary to decentralize decisions: delegate decision-making power to lower levels to gain responsiveness.

Decentralization is the process of pushing decision-making authority down the organizational hierarchy, giving lower-level personnel more responsibility and power to make and implement decisions. Benefits of decentralization can include quicker decision-making, increased levels of innovation and creativity, greater organizational flexibility, faster development of lower-level managers, and increased levels of job satisfaction and employee commitment. But decentralization can also be risky. If lower-level personnel don’t have the necessary skills and training to perform effectively, they may make costly mistakes. Additionally, decentralization may increase the likelihood of inefficient lines of communication, competing objectives, and duplication of effort.

Several factors must be considered when deciding how much decision-making authority to delegate throughout the organization. These factors include the size of the organization, the speed of change in its environment, managers’ willingness to give up authority, employees’ willingness to accept more authority, and the organization’s geographic dispersion.
Decentralization is usually desirable when the following conditions are met:
* The organization is very large, like ExxonMobil, Ford, or General Electric.
* The firm is in a dynamic environment where quick, local decisions must be made, as in many high-tech industries.
* Managers are willing to share power with their subordinates.
* Employees are willing and able to take more responsibility.
* The company is spread out geographically, such as Nordstrom, Caterpillar, or Ford.
As organizations grow and change, they continually reevaluate their structure to determine whether it is helping the company to achieve its goals. 

Note that there are 2 types of decentralization:

Vertical decentralization delegates decision-making rights to lower levels of the organization. Often this delegation - or deconcentration - comes with carefully embedding this authority into guidelines, policies, backstops, checks, and controls. Such vertical decentralization is limited in several ways. First, it is confined to the scope of the decision maker at the top of the vertical organization (sometimes called the silo). Second, decision-making authority that has been granted is often later revoked by a higher authority; sometimes managers can overrule decisions as they see fit.

Horizontal decentralization distributes decision-making authority evenly across an organization. If done in a formal way, horizontal decentralization does not allow higher-ups to institute or retain “power over” decision rights that could permit them to overrule decisions made by peers.* In horizontal decentralization, there are no managers who delegate some decisions to subordinates - there are only equal players who have processes in place to divide up work and align overarching decisions among themselves.
A simple example of horizontal decentralization would be a self-organizing team in which team members collectively decide to divide up tasks among themselves without a central boss who assumes final responsibility over task distribution and execution.

Mechanistic versus Organic Structures

Structural design generally follows one of the two basic models: mechanistic or organic. A mechanistic organization is characterized by a relatively high degree of job specialization, rigid departmentalization, many layers of management (particularly middle management), narrow spans of control, centralized decision-making, and a long chain of command. This combination of elements results in what is called a tall organizational structure. The U.S. Army and the United Nations are typical mechanistic organizations.

In contrast, an organic organization is characterized by a relatively low degree of job specialization, loose departmentalization, few levels of management, wide spans of control, decentralized decision-making, and a short chain of command. This combination of elements results in what is called a flat organizational structure. Colleges and universities tend to have flat organizational structures, with only two or three levels of administration between the faculty and the president. Exhibit 7.9 shows examples of flat and tall organizational structures.

Although few organizations are purely mechanistic or purely organic, most organizations tend more toward one type or the other. The decision to create a more mechanistic or a more organic structural design is based on factors such as the firm’s overall strategy, the size of the organization, and the stability of its external environment, among others.

A company’s organizational structure should enable it to achieve its goals, and because setting corporate goals is part of a firm’s overall strategy-making process, it follows that a company’s structure depends on its strategy. That alignment can be challenging for struggling companies trying to accomplish multiple goals. For example, a company with an innovation strategy will need the flexibility and fluid movement of information that an organic organization provides. But a company using a cost-control strategy will require the efficiency and tight control of a mechanistic organization. Often, struggling companies try to simultaneously increase innovation and rein in costs, which can be organizational challenges for managers. Such is the case at Microsoft, where CEO Satya Nadella cut more than 18,000 jobs in 2014 after taking the helm at the technology giant. Most of the cuts were the result of the company’s failed acquisition of Nokia’s mobile phone business. More recently, the company eliminated additional jobs in sales and marketing (mostly overseas) as Microsoft shifts from a software developer to a cloud computing software delivery service. At the same time, Nadella is also trying to encourage employees and managers to break down barriers between divisions and increase the pace of innovation across the organization.

Size is another factor that affects how mechanistic or organic a company’s organizational structure is. Much research has been conducted that shows a company’s size has a significant impact on its organizational structure. Smaller companies tend to follow the more organic model, in part because they can. It’s much easier to be successful with decentralized decision-making, for example, if you have only 50 employees. A company with that few employees is also more likely, by virtue of its size, to have a lesser degree of employee specialization. That’s because, when there are fewer people to do the work, those people tend to know more about the entire process. As a company grows, it becomes more mechanistic, as systems are put in place to manage the greater number of employees. Procedures, rules, and regulations replace flexibility, innovation, and independence. That isn’t always the case, however. W. L. Gore has nearly 10,000 employees and more than $3 billion in annual revenues, but, as noted earlier, uses an extremely organic organizational structure. Employees have no bosses, participate on teams, and often create roles for themselves to fill functional gaps within the company.

Lastly, the business in which a company operates has a significant impact on its organizational structure. In complex, dynamic, and unstable environments, companies need to organize for flexibility and agility. That is, their organizational structures need to respond to rapid and unexpected changes in the business environment. For companies operating in stable environments, however, the demands for flexibility and agility are not so great. The environment is predictable. In a simple, stable environment, therefore, companies benefit from the efficiencies created by a mechanistic organizational structure.

Formal Structures

Line-and-Staff Organization

The line organization is designed with direct, clear lines of authority and communication flowing from the top managers downward. Managers have direct control over all activities, including administrative duties. An organization chart for this type of structure would show that all positions in the firm are directly connected via an imaginary line extending from the highest position in the organization to the lowest (where production of goods and services takes place). This structure, with its simple design and broad managerial control, is often well-suited to small, entrepreneurial firms.

As an organization grows and becomes more complex, the line organization can be enhanced by adding staff positions to the design. Staff positions provide specialized advisory and support services to line managers in the line-and-staff organization, shown in Exhibit 7.6. In daily operations, individuals in line positions are directly involved in the processes used to create goods and services. Individuals in staff positions provide the administrative and support services that line employees need to achieve the firm’s goals. Line positions in organizations are typically in areas such as production, marketing, and finance. Staff positions are found in areas such as legal counseling, managerial consulting, public relations, and human resource management.
Although traditional forms of departmentalization still represent how many companies organize their work, newer, more flexible organizational structures are in use at many firms. Let’s look at matrix and committee structures and how those two types of organizations are helping companies better leverage the diverse skills of their employees.

Typical Organizational Structures

Within the context of mechanistic versus organic structures, specific types of organizational structures in the United States historically evolved over at least three eras, as we discuss here before explaining types of organizational designs. During the first era, the mid-1800s to the late 1970s, organizations were mechanistic self-contained, top-down pyramids. Emphasis was placed on internal organizational processes of taking in raw materials, transforming those into products, and turning them out to customers.
Early organizational structures were focused on internal hierarchical control and separate functional specializations in order to adapt to external environments. Structures during this era grouped people into functions or departments, specified reporting relationships among those people and departments, and developed systems to coordinate and integrate work horizontally and vertically. As will be explained, the functional structure evolved first, followed by the divisional structure and then the matrix structured.
The second era started in the 1980s and extended through the mid-1990s. More-complex environments, markets, and technologies strained mechanistic organizational structures. Competition from Japan in the auto industry and complex transactions in the banking, insurance, and other industries that emphasized customer value, demand and faster interactions, quality, and results issued the need for more organic organizational designs and structures.

Communication and coordination between and among internal organizational units and external customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders required higher levels of integration and speed of informational processing. Personal computers and networks had also entered the scene. In effect, the so-called “horizontal organization” was born, which emphasized “reengineering along workflow processes that link organizational capabilities to customers and suppliers.” Ford, Xerox Corp., Lexmark, and Eastman Kodak Company are examples of early adopters of the horizontal organizational design, which, unlike the top-down pyramid structures in the first era, brought flattened hierarchical, hybrid structures and cross-functional teams.

The third era started in the mid-1990s and extends to the present. Several factors contributed to the rise of this era: the Internet; global competition—particularly from China and India with low-cost labor; automation of supply chains; and outsourcing of expertise to speed up production and delivery of products and services. The so-called silos and walls of organizations opened up; everything could not be or did not have to be produced within the confines of an organization, especially if corporations were cutting costs and outsourcing different functions of products to save costs. During this period, further extensions of the horizontal and organic types of structures evolved: the divisional, matrix, global geographic, modular, team-based, and virtual structures were created.
In the following discussion, we identify major types of structures mentioned above and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each. Note that in many larger national and international corporations, there is a mix and match among different structures used. There are also advantages and disadvantages of each structure. Again, organizational structures are designed to fit with external environments. Depending on the type of environments from our earlier discussion in which a company operates, the structure should facilitate that organization’s capability to achieve its vision, mission, and goals.

Note the continuum, showing the earliest form of organizational structure, functional, evolving with more complex environments to divisional, matrix, team-based, and then virtual. This evolution, as discussed above, is presented as a continuum from mechanistic to organic structures—moving from more simple, stable environments to complex, changing ones, as illustrated. The six types of organizational structures discussed here include functional, divisional, geographic, matrix, networked/team, and virtual.

The functional structure, is among the earliest and most used organizational designs. This structure is organized by departments and expertise areas, such as R&D (research & development), production, accounting, and human resources. Functional organizations are referred to as pyramid structures since they are governed as a hierarchical, top-down control system.

Small companies, start-ups, and organizations working in simple, stable environments use this structure, as do many large government organizations and divisions of large companies for certain tasks. The functional structure excels in providing for a high degree of specialization and a simple and straightforward reporting system within departments, offers economies of scale, and is not difficult to scale if and when the organization grows. Disadvantages of this structure include isolation of departments from each other since they tend to form “silos,” which are characterized by closed mindsets that are not open to communicating across departments, lack of quick decision-making and coordination of tasks across departments, and competition for power and resources.

Divisional structures, are, in effect, many functional departments grouped under a division head. Each functional group in a division has its own marketing, sales, accounting, manufacturing, and production team. This structure resembles a product structure that also has profit centers. These smaller functional areas or departments can also be grouped by different markets, geographies, products, services, or other whatever is required by the company’s business. The market-based structure is ideal for an organization that has products or services that are unique to specific market segments and is particularly effective if that organization has advanced knowledge of those segments.

The advantages of a divisional structure include the following: each specialty area can be more focused on the business segment and budget that it manages; everyone can more easily know their responsibilities and accountability expectations; customer contact and service can be quicker; and coordination within a divisional grouping is easier, since all the functions are accessible. The divisional structure is also helpful for large companies since decentralized decision-making means that headquarters does not have to micromanage all the divisions. The disadvantages of this structure from a headquarters perspective are that divisions can easily become isolated and insular from one another and that different systems, such as accounting, finance, sales, and so on, may suffer from poor and infrequent communication and coordination of enterprise mission, direction, and values. Moreover, incompatibility of systems (technology, accounting, advertising, budgets) can occur, which creates a strain on company strategic goals and objectives.
A geographic structure, is another option aimed at moving from a mechanistic to more organic design to serve customers faster and with relevant products and services; as such, this structure is organized by locations of customers that a company serves. This structure evolved as companies became more national, international, and global. Geographic structures resemble and are extensions of the divisional structure.

Organizing geographically enables each geographic organizational unit (like a division) the ability to understand, research, and design products and/or services with the knowledge of customer needs, tastes, and cultural differences. The advantages and disadvantages of the geographic structure are similar to those of the divisional structure. Headquarters must ensure effective coordination and control over each somewhat autonomous geographically self-contained structure.
The main downside of a geographical organizational structure is that it can be easy for decision-making to become decentralized, as geographic divisions (which can be hundreds if not thousands of miles away from corporate headquarters) often have a great deal of autonomy.

The matrix structure (also called the project management approach) is sometimes used in conjunction with the traditional line-and-staff structure in an organization. Essentially, this structure combines two different forms of departmentalization, functional and product, that have complementary strengths and weaknesses. The matrix structure brings together people from different functional areas of the organization (such as manufacturing, finance, and marketing) to work on a special project. Each employee has two direct supervisors: the line manager from her or his specific functional area and the project manager. The image shows a matrix organization with four special project groups (A, B, C, D), each with its own project manager. Because of the dual chain of command, the matrix structure presents some unique challenges for both managers and subordinates.

Advantages of the matrix structure include:
* Teamwork. By pooling the skills and abilities of various specialists, the company can increase creativity and innovation and tackle more complex tasks.
* Efficient use of resources. Project managers use only the specialized staff they need to get the job done, instead of building large groups of underused personnel.
* Flexibility. The project structure is flexible and can adapt quickly to changes in the environment; the group can be disbanded quickly when it is no longer needed.
* Ability to balance conflicting objectives. The customer wants a quality product and predictable costs. The organization wants high profits and the development of technical capability for the future. These competing goals serve as a focal point for directing activities and overcoming conflict. The marketing representative can represent the customer, the finance representative can advocate high profits, and the engineers can push for technical capabilities.
* Higher performance. Employees working on special project teams may experience increased feelings of ownership, commitment, and motivation.
* Opportunities for personal and professional development. The project structure gives individuals the opportunity to develop and strengthen technical and interpersonal skills.

Disadvantages of the matrix structure include:
* Power struggles. Functional and product managers may have different goals and management styles.
* Confusion among team members. Reporting relationships and job responsibilities may be unclear.
* Lack of cohesiveness. Team members from different functional areas may have difficulty communicating effectively and working together as a team.

Although project-based matrix organizations can improve a company’s flexibility and teamwork, some companies are trying to unravel complex matrix structures that create limited accountability and complicate day-to-day operations. Some CEOs and other top managers suggest that matrix structures make it easier to blame others when things don’t go as planned.

Networked team structures are another form of the horizontal organization. Moving beyond the matrix structure, networked teams are more informal and flexible. “[N]etworks have two salient characteristics: clustering and path length. Clustering refers to the degree to which a network is made up of tightly knit groups while path lengths is a measure of distance—the average number of links separating any two nodes in the network.”28 A more technical explanation can be found in this footnote source.29 For our purposes here, a networked organizational structure is one that naturally forms after being initially assigned. Based on the vision, mission, and needs of a problem or opportunity, team members will find others who can help—if the larger organization and leaders do not prevent or obstruct that process.

There is not one classical depiction of this structure, since different companies initially design teams to solve problems, find opportunities, and discover resources to do so. Stated another way, “The networked organization is one that is connected together by informal networks and the demands of the task, rather than a formal organizational structure. The network organization prioritizes its ‘soft structure’ of relationships, networks, teams, groups and communities rather than reporting lines.”

The Informal Organization
Up to this point, we have focused on formal organizational structures that can be seen in the boxes and lines of the organization chart. Yet many important relationships within an organization do not show up on an organization chart. Nevertheless, these relationships can affect the decisions and performance of employees at all levels of the organization.
The network of connections and channels of communication based on the informal relationships of individuals inside the organization is known as the informal organization. Informal relationships can be between people at the same hierarchical level or between people at different levels and in different departments. Some connections are work-related, such as those formed among people who carpool or ride the same train to work. Others are based on nonwork commonalties such as belonging to the same church or health club or having children who attend the same school.

Functions of the Informal Organization

The informal organization has several important functions. First, it provides a source of friendships and social contact for organization members. Second, the interpersonal relationships and informal groups help employees feel better-informed about and connected with what is going on in their firm, thus giving them some sense of control over their work environment. Third, the informal organization can provide status and recognition that the formal organization cannot or will not provide employees. Fourth, the network of relationships can aid the socialization of new employees by informally passing along rules, responsibilities, basic objectives, and job expectations. Finally, the organizational grapevine helps employees to be more aware of what is happening in their workplace by transmitting information quickly and conveying it to places that the formal system does not reach.


Informal Communication Channels

The informal channels of communication used by the informal organization are often referred to as the grapevine or the rumor mill. Managers need to pay attention to the grapevines in their organization, because their employees increasingly put a great deal of stock in the information that travels along it, especially in this era of social media. A recent survey found that many business leaders have their work cut out for them in the speeches and presentations they give employees. Survey participants were asked if they would believe a message delivered in a speech by a company leader or one that they heard over the grapevine. Forty-seven percent of those responding said they would put more credibility in the grapevine. Only 42 percent said they would believe senior leadership, and another 11 percent indicated they would believe a blend of elements from both messages. Perhaps even more interesting is how accurate employees perceive their company grapevine to be: 57 percent gave it favorable ratings. “The grapevine may not be wholly accurate, but it is a very reliable indicator that something is going on,” said one survey respondent.
With this in mind, managers need to learn to use the existing informal organization as a tool that can potentially benefit the formal organization. An excellent way of putting the informal organization to work for the good of the company is to bring informal leaders into the decision-making process. That way, at least the people who use and nurture the grapevine will have more accurate information to send it.

The Virtual Corporation

One of the biggest challenges for companies today is adapting to the technological changes that are affecting all industries. Organizations are struggling to find new organizational structures that will help them transform information technology into a competitive advantage. One alternative that is becoming increasingly prevalent is the virtual corporation, which is a network of independent companies (suppliers, customers, even competitors) linked by information technology to share skills, costs, and access to one another’s markets. This network structure allows companies to come together quickly to exploit rapidly changing opportunities. The key attributes of a virtual corporation are:
* Technology. Information technology helps geographically distant companies form alliances and work together.
* Opportunism. Alliances are less permanent, less formal, and more opportunistic than in traditional partnerships.
* Excellence. Each partner brings its core competencies to the alliance, so it is possible to create an organization with higher quality in every functional area and increase competitive advantage.
* Trust. The network structure makes companies more reliant on each other and forces them to strengthen relationships with partners.
* No borders. This structure expands the traditional boundaries of an organization.
In the concept’s purest form, each company that links up with others to create a virtual corporation is stripped to its essence. Ideally, the virtual corporation has neither a central office nor an organization chart, no hierarchy, and no vertical integration. It contributes to an alliance only its core competencies, or key capabilities. It mixes and matches what it does best with the core competencies of other companies and entrepreneurs. For example, a manufacturer would only manufacture, while relying on a product design firm to decide what to make and a marketing company to sell the end result.
Although firms that are purely virtual organizations are still relatively scarce, many companies are embracing several characteristics of the virtual structure. One example is Cisco Systems. Cisco uses many manufacturing plants to produce its products, but the company owns none of them. In fact, Cisco now relies on contract manufacturers for all of its manufacturing needs. Human hands probably touch fewer than 10 percent of all customer orders, with fewer than half of all orders processed by a Cisco employee. To the average customer, the interdependency of Cisco’s suppliers and inventory systems makes it look like one huge, seamless company.

The liberated company

A "liberated company" is an organizational concept that refers to a company where traditional hierarchical structures and rigid management practices are significantly reduced or even eliminated. In a liberated company, employees are given more autonomy, decision-making power, and responsibility, which often leads to a more decentralized and collaborative work environment.
The objective is to put people at the heart of the company's operations.
The core principles:
Let employees take individual initiatives rather than following directives imposed by their superiors. Employees at all levels are empowered to make decisions that affect their work.
Hierarchy is removed : the pyramidal hierarchical structure is replaced by a flat structure where each employee directs themselves or organizes themselves into small teams (controls and surveillance are a thing of the past).
Information is freely shared within the organization, promoting openness and trust.
Employees are often motivated by a shared sense of purpose or mission, rather than by traditional incentives like bonuses or promotions
The liberated company hopes to increase productivity, efficiency and internal cohesion. It also aims to increase agility and innovation. However, this increases stress (are people ready? Prepared?), can be a challenge if employees WANT strong hierarchy and leaders and could result in anarchy.
Buurtzorg, a Dutch healthcare organization operates with self-managed teams of nurses, allowing them to provide personalized care without traditional management oversight.  Some takeaways from their experience:
* Feedback and open communication are key. “If it’s not safe enough to talk with each other about problems or mistakes then you can get very big problems."
* Focus on the health of teams. “When you have a good team and it feels safe, you always have a solution.”
* Leverage each team member’s unique strengths. “You find out things you didn’t think you could do. You get the best from yourself. You stimulate each other. If you can’t do it, someone else can. Together you are strong.”
* Watch out for burnout. “A lot of people feel too responsible, they cannot let it go.”
* Advice for leaders: “Let go and trust. Only coach.”
* Self-management isn’t for everyone. “I don’t think everybody is capable or wants to be like this. Some people want a boss. They feel safe. If they have to think for themselves, they don’t like it.”


